So let's get started building some basic,
very basic node REST API here.
For that, I'll create a new subfolder, node
and a new subfolder, deno.
And in the node folder,
unsurprisingly, we'll build the node API.
Now it'll be a simple API.
Nonetheless, in there, we'll have an app.js file,
we'll have our routes folder for your routes.
We could add a controllers and a model's folder,
but since it will be a very simple API with some dummy data,
I'll just go with this basic data structure.
Now it'll be a very simple todo API.
And I noted everyone hates todos,
but I'm going to go with some todos,
because it's not so much about the fancy application,
but it's about the differences between node and Deno.
And the easier the API is and the less amount of work
we have to do there,
the easier it will be to grasp the differences
and to grasp Deno's core features.
So I have the todos.js file in the routes folder.
I have the app.js file.
And now of course, in node's case,
I wanna use express.js here.
So therefore I'll navigate into the node folder
and run npm init to create a new package.json file,
where I'm going to confirm all the defaults,
so that now in that folder,
we can run npm install to install express.
And I'll also install the body parser
to parse incoming request bodies.
Now in app.js, we then require express.
That's how we import in node.
We could also import with the modern import syntax,
which I cover in the modern JavaScript module,
but I'll stick to this traditional approach,
which you'll see in most projects.
Also, I, again, disabled the Deno extension,
so that I get good IDE support in node code?
No, actually that's not the app.
That's the express package, of course,
but we then create the app.
That's what we do by calling express like this.
And on that app, we then can call, listen, for example,
on port 3000 to start listening on that app server.
And now we can register some middleware in node express
with the use method as you learned.
Now, I will outsource some middleware
into the todos.js file.
So here we again, import express by requiring express.
And then here we get access to the router by extracting it
from express.Router like that.
And actually that should be lowercase
because then on the router,
we can register various routes like a get route to /todos,
which will get a middleware function,
with request, response, and next that should return todos.
And by the way, if that's brand new to you,
definitely go through the respective sections
in this course first, this is all node express knowledge
you gained throughout the course.
So we have this get route.
We then have a post route to /todos
to get a new todo, for example.
And we then also have a put route
to replace a todo, for example.
Here, I also want to get the todoId as part of the URL
so that we can extract it from there
and identify the fitting todo and update that accordingly.
It's up to you, by the way,
if you wanna have a put or a patch route here.
And we also have to delete route to todos
and then also some specific todoId, of course,
and then we'll have that middleware function here as well
to delete a todo, just like that.
And ultimately, we export the router here
so that in the app.js file, we can import the todo routes
by requiring ./routes/todos.js,
without the extension actually just todos.
This is how we import this,
and now we can use this as a middleware
and we could also add some other middleware if we wanted to,
we can register any middleware whenever we want.
So here I could console.log some middleware
and I can always call next to proceed
to the next middleware in line.
So that's how we can do this in node express.
Of course our logic is missing here though.
So to keep it simple, I'll just have a todos array up there,
which is a very simple array.
And when we get a get request,
I just want to send back a response with some JSON data,
where I add a todos property, which holds the todos array.
So a very simple response.
If we get a post request, I'll create a newTodo,
which is a JavaScript object that might have an id.
That id could be the current date converted to an ISOString.
And I have the todo text,
which I expect to get from the request.body.
There, I expect to have a text field.
And in order to be able to extract that data
from the body, in app.js, I also want to import
the body-parser by requiring it
from the body-parser package, which we installed.
And I'll register the bodyParser.json middleware here.
And this will parse all incoming requests,
check if they carry JSON data.
And if they do, the JSON data will be parsed
and will be made available as a JavaScript object
on the request.body field.
So we can create a newTodo then,
and we can then reach out to todos
and push the newTodo onto todos.
By the way, if you followed along
with the TypeScript section in this course,
this API might look quite familiar to you.
Now for updating a todo, we need to get that todoID.
I'll store it in a constant named tid.
And we get it from the request.params,
and there we'll have a todoId param
because that's the name we picked here.
So we can extract it here.
And now we need to find the index of the todo
in the todos array.
So todoIndex is todos, which is our array, findIndex
and findIndex takes a function that executes for every todo.
So here we get every todo as an argument,
and we wanna return true if the todo.id
is equal to the extracted tid.
Then we know that's the to do we wanna update.
So then we can reach out to todos for the given todoIndex
and replace the object being stored there with a new object
where I keep the id.
So I still access todos for todoIndex here
and extract the existing id,
but where I set the text to the text we get
on the request.body here.
That's how we could update.
Now we wanna send back a response here
and also for posting, of course.
For posting, my response could have a status code of 201
to indicate that it was successful
and a new resource was created.
And we could have a message where we say, Todo created!
And if we wanted to, of course,
we could also attach the newTodo,
so that we return the created data.
And for updating on the response,
I'll set my status code to 200
and then also attach some JSON data
where the message could be, Updated todo!
Now for deleting, we still will need the todoId
from the params so we can copy this line.
And then I wanna replace my todos array with a new array.
So this array will be replaced with a new array,
which should be the old array minus the item with that id.
So I'll filter the todos array.
And filter takes a function that executes on every element
in the todos array and if we return true here,
this element will be kept.
If we return false, it will be deleted.
So I wanna return true for todos
where the id does not match, because if it does match,
I know it's the element I wanna delete.
And then here, we also can set a status code of 200
and set back some JSON data
where we have a message of, Todo deleted!
And that's a very, very, very trivial API now.
Now with that, if we now run this API,
so if we go into the node...
Oops, into the node folder here,
and I execute my app.js file, it starts executing.
And now we can use tools like Postman, which is a free tool.
You can download and install to test our API.
You can simply visit postman.com, download it there.
You won't need to sign up to do that.
You can just download it like this.
And once you downloaded it and started it,
you should see a screen like this.
If you get a welcome screen, you can simply close that.
And here you can set up new requests.
For example, a get request to localhost:3000/todos.
And this should fetch us all the todos.
Now if I send this, we see that our server works.
I get no todos, but I get a success response.
So sending and parsing and handling the request worked.
Now let's create a newTodo.
For that I'll open up a new tab here and send a post request
to localhost:3000/todos.
And now here we need to append some data.
So under body, we can go to raw
and then pick JSON here in the dropdown.
And that will simply add some JSON data
to the outgoing request.
And there, we should set a text field
because we're going to look for a text field
when we extract data from the body on the server side.
So we should make sure that text exists here,
and then I can send a new todo, click send,
and I get this confirmation message, status code 201.
And if we now fetch all todos, we see the new todo here.
Now for updating, it will the need todoid
so we can copy that and send a new request, a put request,
because I'm waiting for a put request here
to localhost:3000/todo/ that id.
Now the put request also needs the new data
with which we wanna update the todo.
So under body, we still wanna add some JSON data,
and that should again be a JSON object,
which has a text key because we're also looking
for the text field on the put request here,
and there we'll have our updated todo text.
If I now send this, this seems to work.
We get back the success response.
And if we get all todos,
we see the updated text here as well.
Now last but not least, for deleting,
if we send a delete request
to localhost:3000/todos/ that id,
we don't need to add any extra data.
And if we send this, it seems to work.
We get the confirmation message.
And if we now get all todos, we're back to an empty array.
So our API works, but that's of course, just node.js.
Now let's see how we would build that same API
with Deno and Oak.